Nice theatre, but didn't they kill Caesar here?
================================================

*This week, Ewan C. examines the form and function of Rome's first
permanent theatre and its related complex. The site is home to arguably
the most infamous betrayal in political history, as well as other, less
perilous dramas, yet was also a centre of arts and horticulture. Let's
take a further look at the Theatre of Pompey!*

Built by Pompey the Great (*fig. 1 a*), one of Republican Rome's most
accomplished generals, in 55 BC, the theatre of Pompey and its
surrounding building complex (*fig. 2*) is considered one of Rome's
greatest monuments, both by its contemporaries and modern scholars.
Testament to the complex's significance is the fact that, despite being
the location of Caesar's (*fig. 1 b*) murder on the Ides of March 44 BC,
it was restored by his adopted son, Augustus, in 32 BC. The complex
underwent numerous repairs, restorations and reconstructions in its life
time, remaining in use right up until the 6^th^ century AD
[@GagliardoPacker: 95], always functioning, at least partially, as a
'public' space.

The Complex
===========

Dio Cassius [(Cass. Dio.
39.38)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/39*.html#38)
and Plutarch [(Plut. *Pomp*.
52)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Pompey*.html#52)
inform us that the building was finished in 55 BC during Pompey's 2^nd^
consulship. Thanks to Cicero's oration against Piso [(Cic. *Pis*.
27.65)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0020%3Atext%3DPis.%3Achapter%3D27);,
the opening of the whole complex by Pompey can also be dated to 55 BC
[@GagliardoPacker: 93].

Through a number of different sources, we know exactly where it was
located (*fig. 3*). Thanks to archaeological remains (*fig. 4)*, the
shape of the modern city of Rome (*fig. 5)*, and the Severan Marble Plan
of Rome (*fig. 6)*, we can deduce that the building was situated on the
Campus Martius, a name given to the large area of public land north-west
of the geographic centre of the city.

Pompey combined numerous traditional Roman structures within his
building complex (*fig. 2*) [@Temelini: 40]; These were a temple, a
theatre, and a *quadriportico*.[^1] The structure was also home to a
garden and a *curia*.[^2] The structure faced east; something Vitruvius
[(Vitr.
4.5.1)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Vitruvius/4*.html)
tells us was typical for Greek and Roman temples of the time.

Archaeological Remains and other evidence
=========================================

Besides the written evidence, our understanding of the complex of Pompey
is largely derived from the archaeological remains of the structure and
the [Severan Marble Plan of Rome](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/)
(*Forma Urbis Romae*).

The archaeological remains of the complex are mostly underground or have
been integrated into the modern city-scape. For instance, remains of the
Portico and Curia have been found underneath the *Largo di Torre
Argentina* (*fig. 4*), and housing on the *via di Grottapinta* follows
the curve of the ancient theatre (*fig.* *5*).

The [*Forma Urbis
Romae*](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/docs/FURslabmap.html) is a plan
of Rome from the reign of Emperor Septimius Severus (AD 193 -- AD 211)
with a scale of 1:240 that was 18.22 m x 12.87 m. Since the first pieces
were found in AD 1562, 1,186 fragments have been recovered. The complex
of Pompey is preserved in several fragments from [Slabs
III-11](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/slab.php?slab=110) (*fig. 6*)
and [IV-6](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/slab.php?slab=96) of the
plan. While some have been lost, they were all documented by
[Carettoni](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/plate.php?plateindex=31).

The Theatre of Pompey
=====================

Pompey's theatre was the first stone theatre in Rome, as permanent
seating was traditionally banned in the ancient city. Tertullian [(Tert.
*de spect*.
X)](http://www.tertullian.org/lfc/LFC10-13_de_spectaculis.htm) and Pliny
the Elder [(Plin. *NH*.
8.7.20)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Plin.+Nat.+8.7&fromdoc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1919.02.0137)
tell us that Pompey legitimised his theatre by dedicating it as a Temple
of *Venus Victrix*.[^3] According to Plutarch [(Plut. *Pomp*.
42.4)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Pompey*.html#42.4),
Pompey drew inspiration for his theatre from that of Mytilene in Greece,
asking for detailed drawings to be made of its plan.

The theatre was 35 m tall and 150 m in diameter [@Temelini: 42]. It
was semi-circular in shape and consisted of five major components:

-   *cavea* (seating)

-   *orchestra* (circular space in front of the stage)

-   *pulpitum* (stage)

-   *scaenae frons* (architectural backdrop)

-   Temple of *Venus Victrix*.

The *cavea* is thought to have seated at least 20,000 people
[@Temelini: 42]. Some modern reconstructions, including those by
[Canina](http://www.pompey.cch.kcl.ac.uk/Canina.htm) and
[Blazeby](http://www.pompey.cch.kcl.ac.uk/blazeby_files/blazeby3d04.htm),
split the seating in the *cavea* into two sections, as is seen in the
*Forma Urbis Romae* (*fig. 6*). However, others, such as
[Burge](http://www.pompey.cch.kcl.ac.uk/burge_files/burge3d01.htm), have
included three sections of *cavea* in their reconstructions. This
illustrates the speculatory nature of modern reconstructions.

Besides the temple, the focus of the theatre was the *pulpitum* and the
*scanae* *frons*. The *pulpitum* was the main stage where the many
theatrical performances would have taken place. The *scaenae frons* was
situated right behind it, as a backdrop. The enormous permanent *scanae
frons* seen in the *Forma Urbis Romae,* and thus most modern
reconstructions (e.g. *figs. 2 & 7*), is from the reign of Septimius
Severus. As Gleason notes, it is very possible that the theatre's
original *scaenae frons* were temporary, constructed primarily from wood
[@Gleason: 24]. Once made permanent however, as argued by Sear, there
is evidence that the theatre's *scaenae frons* were copied at other
sites across the empire [@Sear].

Temple of Venus Victrix
=======================

Besides the fact that it sat at the top of the *cavea* and was dedicated
to the goddess *Venus Victrix*, not much is known about the temple in
Pompey's theatrical complex. The common consensus among scholars is that
it was very large and ornate, rising above the roof of *cavea*, and
protruding out the back of the theatre (*figs. 2 & 7*). However,
[Richardson](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/docs/FURbiblio.html#Richardson198)
argues that the size and form of the Temple has been exaggerated,
largely due to misinterpretation of the *Forma Urbis Romae* fragments
[@Richardson: 124-6]. He claims that the rectangular structure
protruding from the back of the theatre on the plan is in fact a street
(*fig. 6*), and that the temple was instead of modest architecture,
harmonious with the rest of the *cavea* [@Richardson: 124-6]. This
disagreement in modern scholarship illustrates the need for caution when
using modern reconstructions.

The Curia
=========

The Curia of Pompey was located at the eastern end of the
*quadriportico* (*figs.* *2* & *8*). It is thought that the space would
have been able to accommodate 600 senators as well as visitors. Plutarch
tells us that it was structurally incorporated into the *quadriportico*
itself, and that it housed a statue of Pompey [(Plut. *Brut*.
14)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Brutus*.html#14).

After the *curia* in the *forum*[^4] was destroyed by a fire in 52 BC,
the Curia of Pompey became a place for the senate to hold meetings
[@Temelini: 74]. Suetonius [(Suet. *Caes*. 80,
81)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Julius*.html)
and Plutarch [(Plut. *Brut*.
17-8)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Brutus*.html#17)
tell us that it was here, during one of these senate meetings in 44 BC,
that Julius Caesar was assassinated. Suetonius [(Suet. *Aug*.
31.5)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Augustus*.html#31)
and Cassius Dio [(Cass. Dio.
47.19)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/47*.html#19)
inform us that during the reign of Augustus (27 BC -- AD 14) the space
was closed off, and the statue of Pompey was removed upon Augustus'
orders.

 The *quadriportico*
====================

The *quadriportico* (*figs. 2 & 8*) was an immense enclosed space,
approximately 180 m long and 135 m wide [@Temelini: 44]. The
*quadriportico* consisted of a double colonnade outlining a large open
public space, which was most likely a park consisting of a number of
gardens [@Temelini: 45].

As recorded by Vitruvius [(Vitr.
5.9.1)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Vitruvius/5*.html#9.1),
the exterior colonnade was entirely sheltered from the elements,
allowing for the space to be used all year-round. There were also a
series of rooms connected to this exterior colonnade, with various
social, administrative and economic uses. For instance, some rooms were
given to local guilds, and others acted as storage units for grain
[@Temelini: 33].

The interior colonnade surrounded a large peristyle consisting of
several gardens*.* The colonnade was also embellished with a great
number of artworks, namely paintings and sculptures. The paintings were
typically of mythological or historical figures. For instance, Pliny
states that there was a painting of mythological hero Cadmus and his
sister Europa [(Plin. *NH*.
35.37)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Plin.+Nat.+35.37&fromdoc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137),
as well as another "*very fine*" painting of Alexander [(Plin. *NH*.
35.40)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D35%3Achapter%3D40).
The sculptures within the gardens and their surrounding *quadriportico*
depicted similar scenes. Pliny [(Plin. *NH*.
36.4)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Plin.+Nat.+36.4&fromdoc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1199.02.0137)
and Suetonius [(Suet. *Nero*.
46)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Nero*.html#46)
tell us that within the porticos there were fourteen statues
personifying the nations conquered by Rome. A statue of a group of muses
has also recently been found in the archaeological record [@Gleason:
19; @Russell: 131], as well as a gilded bronze statue of Hercules
(*fig.9*).

We are told by Propertius [(Prop.
II.32.11‑12)](https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/PropertiusBkTwo.php#anchor_Toc201112289)
that within the gardens there were densely arranged parallel
*plane-trees*, statues and running water features, effectively imagined
in *figure* *8*. The Garden was also the first garden outside the
religious boundary of Rome which was opened to the public by a private
donor (Pompey) [@Russell: 130]. Peristyle gardens were a very common
feature of private villas and mansions of the period. As such, this
public peristyle would have provided the average Roman with a glimpse
into the private villas of the elite [@Russell: 132].

People could thus walk amongst these beautiful gardens under the shade
of trees and admire the surrounding art, or perhaps choose to socialise,
surrounded by greenery and the sound of running water. As Temelini
[@Temelini: 54] effectively summarises, "*The porticus-garden was
intended to provide the Roman community with a formal setting for rest,
relaxation, and quiet contemplation."*

Restorations and alterations
============================

The complex underwent numerous restorations and alterations during its
life. For instance, we are told that Augustus [(Aug. *RG*.
20)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Augustus/Res_Gestae/4*.html#20)
and Claudius [(Suet. *Claud*.
21)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Claudius*.html#21)
rebuilt sections of the theatre. Additionally, Cassius Dio [(Cass. Dio.
62.6.1‑2)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/62*.html#6)
claims that Nero gilded the entire theatre and erected purple curtains
above the theatre for shade. In typical Nero fashion, these curtains
depicted him upon a chariot. While Cassius Dio may be reporting events
with a level of exaggeration, his account illustrates that the theatre
was sometimes shaded. This was not always the case, as evidenced by
Martial [(Mart.
xiv.29.1.)](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book14.htm),
writing that, when windy, awnings could not be drawn up, and people had
to wear broad-brimmed hats to shade themselves.

The Theatre of Pompey: Home of the performing arts, religion, leisure, politics and murder.
===========================================================================================

The Theatrical complex of Pompey on the Campus Martius was an impressive
structure. It incorporated several different buildings and architectural
styles to create a multi-purposed and aesthetically pleasing complex.
The structure provided a large public space for leisure activities. A
Roman could enjoy a walk through its beautiful peristyle gardens,
admiring a well-crafted bronze statue of Hercules whilst physically
isolated from the clamour of the city. Alternatively, they could take a
seat in the *cavea* along with thousands of others and watch a Greek
tragedy under the shade of Nero's purple curtains. However, what they
could not do, was visit the site of Julius Caesar's assassination.

Further Reading
===============

A good amount of information used in this blog has been sourced from:

Temelini, M. A. (1993), [*The Function of Pompey's Building Complex in
the Campus Martius*](http://dx.doi.org/10.20381/ruor-11398) (master's
thesis), Ottawa: University of Ottawa.

[The 'Pompey Project'
website](http://www.pompey.cch.kcl.ac.uk/index.htm), created by King's
Visualisation lab (KVL), provides a great overview of the structure. It
covers topics such as the theatre's history and its excavations, as well
as providing some 2D and 3D reconstructions of the theatre.

The [surviving fragments of the *Forma Urbis
Romae*](https://formaurbis.stanford.edu/index.html) are published as
part of the 'Stanford Digital Forma Urbis Romae Project'.

Bibliography
============

[^1]: A four-sided portico

[^2]: A Roman building typically used for senatorial meetings

[^3]: Victorious Venus

[^4]: The traditional socio-political and economic centre of Republican
    Rome
