Slums of Rome-Life in the *Subura*
==================================

In what is considered by many to be the worst part of Rome, the young
Julius Caesar would grow up to become the immortal figure we know today.
According to our sources, the *Subura* is little more than a
crime-ridden slum, rife with prostitution and called dirty ([Martial.
5.22](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book05.htm))
hot ([Juvenal.
11.50](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Juvenal_and_Persius/The_Satires_of_Juvenal/Satire_11))
and wet. Yet this is a place where someone as influential as Caesar
could live, so what can we gather about this lesser-known area of Rome?

The Ancient Melting Pot
-----------------------

The *Subura* existed between the Viminal and Cispian Hills, nestled in a
valley on the north-eastern side of the Roman Forum. This spot in the
valley likely added a lot to its reputation as a "district" of Rome in
the absence of formal urban division ([Malmberg, 2008;
41](https://traj.openlibhums.org/articles/abstract/10.16995/TRAC2008_39_51/))
as it could be seen in its entirety from the hills above. The *Subura*
was connected to the Republican Forum by the *Argiletum*, a street known
for its vendors and book trade, and also its unsavoury nature shared
with the *Subura* ([Anderson and James,1982;
102](https://www.jstor.org/stable/504296?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)).
This region is described as somewhat of a cultural nexus in Rome as many
foreign travellers would reach the *Subura,* leading to a great variety
of goods being available in its streets. It could be argued that the
foreign population is what might have led to the negative opinion of the
region, as these people were not considered "proper Romans". This
behaviour can also be attributed to the fact the *Subura* is very well
known as the residence of the lowest socioeconomic class, so we may also
be seeing a somewhat classist view among the sources. This is also
something we can see in our own modern day, with many areas that are
heavier in crime also showing higher levels of poverty due to
desperation and the simple need to survive.

*The Subura is made up of many different buildings and landmarks, as
befits a region of its size, and can be characterised through what it is
like to travel through it. There are known to be multiple monumental
fountains at crossroads ([Malmberg, 2008;
45](https://traj.openlibhums.org/articles/abstract/10.16995/TRAC2008_39_51/)),
marking points at which people could meet and use as guide points.
People were even likely to give their names to smaller subdivisions
among the Subura almost like their own suburbs. There has also been
found here a shrine to Mercurius ([Malmberg, 2008;
46](https://traj.openlibhums.org/articles/abstract/10.16995/TRAC2008_39_51/)),
the patron god of commerce, which adds to the idea that the Subura was a
region steeped in trade. The ancient sources also support this claim,
with mention made of tonstrix ([Martial.
2.17](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book02.htm))
(hair-cutters, primarily female), prostitution ([Martial.
6.66](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book06.htm))
and specific goods from all across the empire. Juvenal for instance
makes mention of antelopes, Scythian fowls and flamingos being available
in the Subura ([Juvenal.
11.140](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Juvenal_and_Persius/The_Satires_of_Juvenal/Satire_11)),
while Martial lists Massylian goods ([Martial.
10.94](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book10.htm))
among others ([Martial.
7.31](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book07.htm)).
This idea of the Subura as a place to obtain exotic and exquisite goods
is something that doesn't seem to be shared with the rest of the city,
as a result much of the identity of the district is based around this
fact which is of great interest to modern scholars.*

*This region of Rome is also of note because of just how much of our
knowledge is based on ancient writing as opposed to archaeological
evidence, as being a district of primarily housing it is likely to have
been demolished and paved over many times since the age of the Caesars.
Today if we were to visit the Subura we would see an abundance of
churches, (Andrews, 2014; 63) but this primarily originates from the
early Medieval period, and thus doesn't give us an accurate image of
what the Subura would have looked like. It is apparent though that the
houses further down the hills belonged to those who were less wealthy,
and those higher up the hills had larger and more spacious residences.
The poorest on the other hand were in badly assembled and cramped blocks
that are described by Juvenal as prone to collapse.*

A Home to Caesar
----------------

As well as being a notorious region of the city, the *Subura* is a
region of importance in the life of Julius Caesar. Suetonius mentions
Caesar living here ([Suetonius.
46.1](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Julius*.html#46))
until he becomes Pontifex Maximus in 63BC, when he was 37 years old. The
fact that such an important and well-known figure in Roman history not
only lived here, but also grew up in the *Subura* suggests at least a
small level of respectability that we don't see in many of our existing
sources, which must be noted. Caesar didn't come from an especially poor
or notorious family, so we can infer through this that the *Subura* was
seen as a decent enough place to live for some of the Roman elite. The
district is mentioned during the events of Caesar's assassination on the
Ides of March as well, through the placement of Caesar's ally Lepidus.
Although not directly related to the events of the assassination,
Lepidus held a high rank in the Roman military at the time as Master of
Horse. The conspirators didn't want Lepidus to quickly respond to the
assassination so planned a location away from where he would be that
day. Lepidus is said by Cassius Dio to have been in the *Subura* at this
time, ([Cassius Dio. 44
19.1](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/44*.html))
although he is placed in different areas of Rome by other writers. It is
contested information at the very least, and at worst a complete guess
by Dio who is writing much later.

The Spark that Lit the Fuse
---------------------------

*64AD was an important year for Rome as a city, as it was the year in
which the Great Fire gutted it. Under the reign of Nero, who is now seen
as at least partially responsible, the fire tore through much of Rome
and left many regions in vast states of disrepair. It is unknown just
how much of the Subura was destroyed, although it is debated to be one
of the 3 regions Tacitus ([Tacitus.
15.38-43](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html#44))
describes as completely flattened*[^1]*. It is likely that the Subura
was intended to benefit from the increased building regulations under
Nero's reign, but later sources ([Juvenal.
3.5-9](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Juvenal_and_Persius/The_Satires_of_Juvenal/Satire_3))
suggest that the current buildings were still as haphazard and dangerous
as they had always been. As a result, fire and building collapse was an
ever-present danger to those who resided in the Subura. This shows a
definite continuation of the poor construction of residential buildings
in the district, and suggests that people who lived there were poorer
and more desperate due to such dangerous conditions, giving us an
insight into the lives of the more destitute. Martial writes in one of
his satirical Epigrams the following, which suggests that some owners of
houses in Rome deliberately burned their own homes down to resell the
property at a higher price after the destruction.*

***\"Tongilianus, you paid two hundred for your house;***

***An accident too common in this city destroyed it.***

***You collected ten times more. Doesn\'t it seem, I pray,***

***That you set fire to your own house, Tongilianus?\"* ([Martial.
3.52](http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/martial_epigrams_book03.htm))**

The Imperial *Suburba*
----------------------

As Rome developed more into an Imperial capital throughout the 1^st^ and
2^nd^ centuries AD, the *Subura* became more encroached upon by
construction undertaken by the emperors. The western end of the
*Argiletum* was repaved and developed by Augustus in the later decades
of the 1^st^ century BC (Andrews, 2015; 121), before being later
demolished by emperors Domitian (Andrews, 2015; 123) and Nerva in the
last years of the 1^st^ century AD to construct the Forum of Nerva. A
project which would later become known as the *Forum Transitorium* due
to it being a place of connection between the inner city and the
*Argiletum*. There appears to have been houses along the *Argiletum* in
the later Republican period, as Cicero ([Cicero.
1.14.36](http://perseus.uchicago.edu/perseus-cgi/citequery3.pl?dbname=PerseusLatinTexts&getid=1&query=Cic.%20Att.%201.14))
mentions this, but by the time of Nerva these have been swept away,
either in fire or in Imperial construction ([Anderson, 1982;
102](https://www.jstor.org/stable/504296?seq=1)). Domitian is suggested
to have created this forum with the intention of removing sound from his
father Vespasian's *Templum Pacis*, as the bustling noise from the
*Argiletum* and its vendors would have taken away from the intended
purpose of the Temple ([Anderson, 1982;
108](https://www.jstor.org/stable/504296?seq=1)).

Bibliography
------------

### Modern Sources

Malmberg, Simon "Finding your way in the Subura" Driessen, M., Heeren,
S., Hendriks, J., Kemmers, F., and Visser, R. (eds.) (2009) *TRAC 2008:
Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual Theoretical Roman Archaeology
Conference, Amsterdam 2008*. Oxford: Oxbow Books

Poe, Joe Park "The Septimontium and the Subura" *Transactions of the
American Philological Association (1974-2014*), Vol. 108 (1978),pp.
147-154 The Johns Hopkins University Press

Anderson, James C "Domitian, the Argiletum and the Temple of Peace"
*American Journal of Archaeology*, Vol. 86, No. 1 (Jan., 1982), pp.
101-110 Archaeological Institute of America

Andrews, Margaret M "A Domus in the Subura of Rome from the Republic
Through Late Antiquity" *American Journal of Archaeology*, Vol. 118, No.
1 (January 2014), pp. 61-90 Archaeological Institute of America,

Byles, Richard. *Fire and Its Consequences in the City of Rome in
Antiquity*, 390 BC - AD 410, 2013, PQDT - Global

Andrews, Margaret, Haselberger, Lothar, Bowes, Kimberly, Kinney, Dale,
and Rose, Brian. *Matron, Meretrix, Madonna: An Archaeology and Urban
History of the Subura Valley and Cispian Hill in Rome from the Republic
through the Early Middle Ages*, 2015, ProQuest Dissertations and Theses.

Closs, Virginia. \"Neronianis Temporibus: The So-Called Arae Incendii
Neroniani and the Fire of A.D. 64 in Rome\'s Monumental Landscape.\" 106
(2016): 102-23.

Lott, J. Bert "Regions and Neighbourhoods" in Paul Erdkamp *The
Cambridge Companion to Ancient Rome* (September 2013) pp. 169-89,
Cambridge University Press

### Ancient Sources

Martial, *Epigrams*

*Juvenal, Satires*

Suetonius, *Life of Julius Caesar*

*Tacitus, Annals*

Cicero, *Letters to Atticus*

Cassius Dio, *Book 44*

[^1]: Byles, Richard. *Fire and Its Consequences in the City of Rome in
    Antiquity*, 390 BC - AD 410 82
