---
layout: post
title: 'The Temple of Janus Geminus'
link-citation: true
bibliography: pantheonbib.json
csl: elsevier-harvard.csl
---

By Lee Treadwell
--------------


### Introduction:

Ancient Rome was a city of a wide range of shrines and
temples dedicated to the numerous gods of the Roman religion.
The general concept of *religio* was there for all to see, from the
shrines dedicated to the gods of the household to the capitol of
*Jupiter Optimus Maximus*. The vagaries of time and changes in faith
have seen many of these temples and shrines become lost to the modern
world, a sad fate in which they were destroyed, recycled or simply
forgotten. One such example amongst those lost was the Temple of
Ianus Geminus in Rome. Whilst the building itself may no longer
stand, its function, location and appearance have all been preserved
in other sources. These sources area mix of literary and numismatic
(coin) elements, helping to create a greater interest in the temple.
With the information from these sources, we are provided with a
foundation for our modern understanding of this building which held
a highly contested and unusual significance to the people of Rome.

### Temple Origins:

Within the various literature concerning the temple there have been
many different cited origins. Perhaps the most widely known origin
stems from [Livy's *Ab Urbe
Condita*](http://mcadams.posc.mu.edu/txt/ah/Livy/Livy01.html) (1.19)
originating the temple with the Roman king Numa who famously boosted
the religious nature of the Roman populace.
[Numa](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Numa*.html)
created the temple to serve as an indicator of war and peace,
hoping to increase the respect held for both in doing so.
Archaeologists such as Valentine Müller (1943) have made comparisons
between archaeological and literary sources - such as the supposed
foundation occurring under Romulus and Titus Tatius. The location for
the temple is given to have been in the Forum Roma\`num, which would
place the temple in an area of some significance. [Platner &
Ashby](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Gazetteer/Places/Europe/Italy/Lazio/Roma/Rome/_Texts/PLATOP*/Janus_Geminus.html)
(1929) in their topographical map of Rome place *Ianus Geminus* along
the northern end of the forum. The problem faced by modern
archaeologists is that the temple itself, like many of its kind, has
been demolished; lost forever during the rise of Christianity, although
this may not be entirely accurate. Not long after *Ianus Geminus* was
demolished, it had been largely replaced by the larger *Ianus
Quadrifons* in the *Forum Nervae.* This newer, and far grander temple
resulted in the rendering of the original to a much lower significance.
What is known of *Ianus Geminus'* location is that it stood near the end
of the *Argiletum* one of the main thoroughfares to the *Forum Romanum*.
The map of Republican Rome by [William Shepherd
(1929)](http://www.emersonkent.com/map_archive/forum_romanum.htm) places
the temple within sight of the *Comitium* and the *Rostra.* Such a
position, near some of the most important governmental areas of Rome,
indicates the potential for the temple to serve as a useful
political symbol. However, when referring to Shepherd's map of Imperial
Rome, the temple has ceased to exist in the *Forum Romanum. It was*
replaced instead by parts of the *Forum Nervae* and the *Basilica
Aemilia.* There is no record of the temple ever being rebuilt, though a
temple of similar design and purpose is mentioned by
[Procopius](https://www.loebclassics.com/view/LCL107/1916/volume.xml)
(Gothic Wars 5.25).

### What was it for?

The purpose of the temple is described in various ways depending on the
author of the literature. The most commonly accepted, and what would
have been the most visible purpose, was to serve as a physical
representation of whether the Roman state was at peace or war (*index
pacis bellique*). This purpose is attributed to the well-known Roman
historians: Livy, Plutarch and Suetonius among several others. Perhaps
one of the more important literary explanations of the function of the
temple, can be found in the autobiography [*Res Gestae Divi
Augusti*](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Augustus/Res_Gestae/2*.html).
The closing of the gates of *Ianus Geminus* is listed amongst the
greatest achievements of Augustus' life. The importance of this may
undoubtedly be linked to the infrequent nature of this event. In point
of fact, prior to its multiple closures by Augustus, [Livy
(1.19](http://mcadams.posc.mu.edu/txt/ah/Livy/Livy01.html)) mentions
only two other recorded closings of the temple - first under King Numa
and secondly at the end of the Second Punic War. This makes the fact
that it is recorded that Augustus closed the gates thrice an even more
remarkable feat. Discussion of the temples purpose was not however
limited to historians - with *Ianus Geminus* featuring within the works
of several poets as well. The temple being significant enough to not be
overlooked by numerous poets speaks volumes to the familiarity with the
temple held by the general populace. With that in mind however, the
poets who featured the temple did not necessarily agree upon the
function of the gates. With a differing of opinions centred around
whether the gates trapped peace or war inside. The poets
[Horace](https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/HoraceOdesBkIV.php#anchor_Toc40764116)
and [Ovid](https://www.theoi.com/Text/OvidFasti1.html) both maintained
in their works that *pax* (peace) was to be kept and protected within
the gates away from harm. Whereas,
[Virgil](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0054%3Abook%3D7%3Acard%3D1)
wrote that *bellum* (war) was held imprisoned within the gates of the
temple - held in bondage until it was able to break free and afflict the
Roman world again.

### But what did it look like?:

Just because the temple no longer stands, does not mean we cannot know
what it looked like. One written description is the previously mentioned
description by
[Procopius](https://www.loebclassics.com/view/LCL107/1916/volume.xml)
(5.25), written much later wherein the temple is made entirely from
bronze and stood five cubits (2.28m) high. Whilst this description is
helpful, it is somewhat basic in detail. There are a number of sources
which allow us to look upon an image of the temple. This is thanks to
the existence of its image upon a series of gold (*aureus)* and bronze
(*sestertius*) coins, produced by the Emperor Nero. The coins were all
created to commemorate the closing of the temple gates under Nero -
serving as an effective means of propaganda. Whilst a commonly known
fact being that coins have two sides, often their official names are
unknown. These are referred to as the obverse (heads) and reverse
(tails) sides. Upon the reverse side of these coins, a presumably large
archway is shown sealed by an ornate gate. Around this, is the
declaration that the temple had been closed by the emperor. The golden
[*aurei*](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.58) are dated by
the [Online Coins of the Roman Empire](http://numismatics.org/ocre/)
(OCRE) as to having been produced between 64-66AD. One notable detail
for the *aurei* depiction of *Ianus Geminus,* is that the arch itself
appears to be generally lacking in any outward signs of decoration. The
majority of the examples show the temple as being made of columns with
an archway atop. The arch above the gates is depicted as being somewhat
plain - lacking even a frieze as is often associated with ancient
architecture. Instead the depiction is that the archway atop the columns
is decorated only with a simple lip. Two of the existing coins however,
differ in that they depict the temple as a singular smooth edifice.
Whether this is due to wear or a regional mint variation is unknown. The
gates of *Ianus Geminus* are the feature so commonly referred to in the
literature that are depicted remarkably consistent across the
collection. Each depiction showing an eight panelled gate, with the only
variation being the level of detail on the bars of each gate. The
*[sestertius](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.264)* produced
over greater time (approximately 62-68AD) can be used to identify
further details. The *sestertii* present details of the non-gated side
of the temple revealing a grated window upon the left side, whilst also
showing a decorative garland over the gate itself. Interestingly, unlike
the coins on the OCRE website, those found in the work by Müller shows
some frieze work along the side of the temple. The fact that the coins
were all created to celebrate the closing of the gates is present within
the embossed Latin upon the coins. This helps to create a link between
the literary importance of the event with an actual physical object.
Coins such as these *aurei* and *sestertii,* are extremely valuable
sources to call upon as they preserve not only images and symbols, but
frequently also the cultural significance too. It is for reasons such as
these that numismatics is an extremely worthwhile study.

### Conclusions:

The story of *Ianus Geminus* is one shared by much of the old Rome, lost
to us through the unending march of time. Still, through its presence in
literature and upon the *aurei* and the *sestersii* of Nero it has been
preserved at least in spirit. The study of *Ianus Geminus* not only
presents an interesting view point into some of the more obscure aspects
of Roman religion, it also serves to help keep the traditions of the
past from being forgotten. It is through our connections to the past,
and knowledge of the traditions long since faded, that help us to not
only understand the people of the past but ourselves as well. After all
history isn't just words on a page, it is the story of us.

Figure 1: Aureus of the Emperor Nero. Featuring a bearded Nero wearing a
laurel on the obverse(face) side and depicting the Ianus Geminus on the
reverse side. The embossed inscription on the reverse translates to
Peace of the Roman People being established on land and sea, the gates
of the temple of Janus are closed. Material: Gold. Produced circa 64-65
CE. Open Database License.
<http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.50>

Figure 2: Obverse of a Sestertius of the Emperor Nero, depicting his
bust and official title. Unlike the Aureus, Nero is not featured with a
beard. Material: Bronze. Produced circa 62-68 CE. Open Database License.
<http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.264>

Figure 3: Reverse of figure 2. Depicting the Ianus Geminus from an
angle. Showing latticed window upon the side wall and the gate decorated
by garlands. The inscription is the same as that as upon the Aureus in
figure 1. The presence of S C upon the coin indicate a senatorial
decree, Material: Bronze. Produced circa 62-68 CE. Open Database
License. <http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.264>

Figure 4: Obverse of another example of the Aureus. This example again
features Nero with a beard. Material: Gold. Produced circa 64-65 CE.
Open Database License. <http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.58>

Figure 5: Reverse side of the Aureus from image 4. The void on this
example indicates that unlike image 1, the faces were aligned properly
before striking. Some of the details appear to be more worn away
however. Material: Gold. Produced circa 64-65 CE. Open Database License.
<http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.58>

Figure 6: Obverse of a Sestertius of Nero. Unlike the previous images in
this example Nero appears to be facing in the opposite direction. Nero
does appear beardless but wearing a laurel as on the other sestertius.
Material: Bronze. Produced circa 62-68 CE. Open Database License.
<http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.265>

Figure 7: Reverse side of sestertius revealing more detail of Ianus
Geminus again depicted with the gate decorated by a garland. Material:
Bronze. Produced circa 62-68 CE. Open Database
License.<http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.265>

Figure 8: The Arch of Janus (Ianus Quadrifons), the eventual/potential
replacement to the temple of Ianus Geminus. Located at the north eastern
edge of the Forum Boarium. <https://www.ancient.eu/Janus/>

Guide to Further Reading:

[Livy, *Ab Urbe
Condita*.](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0151%3Abook%3D1%3Achapter%3D18)
(1.19)

[Plutarch, *The Life of
Numa*.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Numa*.html#20)
(20.1-2)

[Suetonius, Divus
Augustus.(22.1).](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Augustus*.html)

[Augustus, *Res Gestae Divi Augusti*
(13)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Augustus/Res_Gestae/2*.html)\
[Lendering, J. *Temple of
Janus*](https://www.livius.org/articles/religion/janus/)

[Bibliography.]{.underline}\
[Cassius Dio, *Roman History* in Carey, E & Foster, H.B. trans. (1917)
*Roman History Volume VI: Book 51-55,* LCL 83, Cambridge,
MA](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/51*.html#20)

[Horace, *Odes* Book IV in Kline, A.S., trans. (2003) *Horace: The
Odes.* viewed 20 May
2019.](https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/HoraceOdesBkIV.php#anchor_Toc40764116)

[Livy, *Ab Urbe Condita* in Heinemann, W. trans. (1919), *Livy Books 1
and 2*, Cambridge,
MA.](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0151%3Abook%3D1%3Achapter%3D18)

[Online Coins of the Roman Empire (2017) *RIC I (Second Edition) Nero
50*, viewed 9 May 2019](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.50)

[Online Coins of the Roman Empire (2017) *RIC I (Second Edition) Nero
58*, viewed 9 May 2019](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.58)

[Online Coins of the Roman Empire (2017) *RIC I (Second Edition) Nero
264*, viewed 9 May
2019](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.264)

[Online Coins of the Roman Empire (2017) *RIC I (Second Edition) Nero
265*, viewed 9 May
2019](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).ner.265) [Ovid, *Fasti* in
Frazer, J.G. trans. (1931) *Ovid: Fasti*, Cambridge,
MA.](https://www.theoi.com/Text/OvidFasti1.html)

[Platner, S.B., (1929) *Janus Geminus* in T Ashby (ed.) *A Topographical
Dictionary of Ancient
Rome*.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Gazetteer/Places/Europe/Italy/Lazio/Roma/Rome/_Texts/PLATOP*/Janus_Geminus.html)

[Plutarch, *The Life of Numa* in Perrin, B. trans. (1914), *Lives,
Volume I: Theseus and Romulus, Lycurgus and Numa, Solon and Publicola.*
LCL 46, Cambridge,
MA.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Numa*.html#20)

[Suetonius, Divus Augustus in Rolfe, J.C., trans. (1913), *The Lives of
The Twelve Caesars*, Cambridge,
MA.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Augustus*.html)

[Suetonius, Divus Vespasian in Rolfe, J.C., trans. (1913), *The Lives of
The Twelve Caesars*, Cambridge,
MA.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Vespasian*.html)

[Tacitus, *Annals* in Jackson, J., trans. (1925), *Tacitus: Annals*,
Cambridge,
MA.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/home.html)

[Virgil, *Aeneid* in Williams, T.C., trans (1910), *Aeneid*,
Boston.](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0054%3Abook%3D7%3Acard%3D1)

Claridge, A. (2010) *Rome: An Oxford Archaeological Guide.* Oxford.

Ely, T. (2003) *The Gods of Greece and Rome*. New York.

[Green, S.J., (2000) "Multiple Interpretation of the Opening and Closing
of the Temple of Janus: A Misunderstanding of Ovid "Fasti" 1.281."
*Mnemosyne 53*,
302-309.](https://www-jstor-org.simsrad.net.ocs.mq.edu.au/stable/pdf/4433099.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A479d3e713b7e583f4c985b2edb9c5fd5)

[Grout, J. (2019) *The Temple of Janus (Janus Geminus),* viewed 8 May
2019](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/~grout/encyclopaedia_romana/imperialfora/nerva/geminus.html)

Hjort, C.L. (2009) *Res Public Constituta: Actium, Apollo and the
Accomplishment of the Triumviral Assignment.* Boston.

[Müller, V., (1943) 'The Shrine of Janus Geminus in Rome' *American
Journal of Archaeology 47*,
437-440](https://www.jstor.org/stable/499831?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)

[Platner, S.B., (1929) *Janus Geminus* in T Ashby (ed.) *A Topographical
Dictionary of Ancient
Rome*.](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Gazetteer/Places/Europe/Italy/Lazio/Roma/Rome/_Texts/PLATOP*/Janus_Geminus.html)

[Rome and Art, (2019), *Temple of Janus*, viewed 8 May
2019](http://www.romeandart.eu/en/art-temple-janus.html)

[Syme, R., (1979) "Problems about Janus", *The American Journal of
Philology 100*,
188-212.](https://www.jstor.org/stable/294238?Search=yes&resultItemClick=true&searchText=problems&searchText=about&searchText=janus&searchUri=%2Faction%2FdoBasicSearch%3FQuery%3Dproblems%2Babout%2Bjanus&ab_segments=0%2Fdefault-2%2Fcontrol&refreqid=search%3A5889a8c48badbd1c9a2e779aff8b0ee3&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)

[Townend, G.B. (1980) "Tacitus, Suetonius and the Temple of Janus*",
Hermes 108*,
*233-242*](https://www.jstor.org/stable/4476162?Search=yes&resultItemClick=true&searchText=tacitus%2C&searchText=suetonius&searchText=and&searchText=the&searchText=temple&searchText=of&searchText=Janus&searchUri=%2Faction%2FdoBasicSearch%3FQuery%3Dtacitus%252C%2Bsuetonius%2Band%2Bthe%2Btemple%2Bof%2BJanus&ab_segments=0%2Fdefault-2%2Fcontrol&refreqid=search%3A178ce1f6e70cddee1b5be052a3fa4fc3)

[VRoma Project, (date unknown), *Shrine of Janus Quirinus/Geminus*,
viewed 10 May 2019](http://www.vroma.org/~bmcmanus/janus.html)

My name is Lee Treadwell I reside in Brisbane, Australia. I am currently
completing my second university degree which is a bachelor of Ancient
History through Macquarie University. My interests in the history of
Rome comes from a natural curiosity towards the past. The ancient Romans
appeal to many of my interests as their society has numerous
similarities to our own. As I have a burgeoning interest in the field of
numismatics, Rome was also a logical choice for studies as throughout
its history many wonderful coins were produced.
