---
layout: post
cover: '/assets/images/pantheon/header.jpg'
caption: 'The Pantheon in all its glory. Photo by Roberta Dragan.'
captionLink: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rome_Pantheon_front.jpg
title: 'The Pantheon!'
date:
tags:
 - rome
 - archaeology
 - Pantheon
category:
 - post
author: tamlin
---

By Tamlin Creighton-See
-----------------------

Immediately after hearing that hallowed name images of domes, grand open
spaces and columns are brought to mind (and porticos too if you know
your terminology!). Few buildings have captured the imagination of the
world quite like the Pantheon, with its unique architectural design, its
many mysteries, and its sheer longevity.

If you'd yelled out 'THE PANTHEON! when asked at trivia night 'What's
the world's largest un-reinforced concrete dome?', you'd be right. But
who designed it? What was it used for? And what's with that big open hole in the top?

Well, fear not! Because once you've reached the end of this blog you'll
have the answer to all of these questions, plus the answer to the best
Roman trivia question: How has the Pantheon managed to last so long?

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 1. The blue dotted Pantheon located in the Campus Martius within the city of Rome."
imageCredit="Author Unknown"
imageCreditLink="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Roma_Plan.jpg"
image="pantheon/figure1.jpg"
width="418"
height="335" %}

Where to begin...?
==================

Oh yeah, so, spoilers, but we don't know exactly who designed the
Pantheon.

Our best guess, based on the current evidence, is that the third and
current iteration of the Pantheon was designed by Apollodorus of
Damascus.

Wait ... third you say?

That's right! According to Cassius Dio, the Pantheon was first built in
the Campus Martius under Marcus Agrippa around 27-25 BCE ([Cass. Dio
53.27](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/53*.html#27.2)).
This early Pantheon was very different in shape to the one we are used
to today, missing the iconic dome on top.

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 2. Marcus Agrippa looking sad, probably because his Pantheon wasn’t received as intended by Augustus (CC by 2.5)."
imageCredit="Photo by Marie-Lan Nguyen"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Agrippa_Gabii_Louvre_Ma1208.jpg"
image="pantheon/figure2.jpg"
width="512"
height="768" %}

The second iteration of the Patheon was the result of extensive
structural damage caused by a fire in 80 CE, Domitian restoring it
shortly afterwards ([Cass. Dio
66.24.2](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/66*.html)).
But the Pantheon could not catch a break, it was struck by lightning in
110 CE and once again caught fire, this time burning completely to the
ground ([Pauli Orosii
7.12](http://www.attalus.org/latin/orosius7A.html#12); Tod & Jones
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n13):
7). A Roman firefighter was certainly never short on work!

The version of the Pantheon we see today was built during the reign of
the Hadrian, around 125-128 CE ([SHA *Hadr*.
19](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Historia_Augusta/Hadrian/2*.html)).
We have this date thanks to some cool brick stamping technology that has
revealed it was *not* built during the reign of his predecessor Trajan,
as had once been thought.[^1]

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 3. Hadrian & Antinous busts, held at the British Museum (CC BY-SA 2.0)."
imageCredit="Photo By Carole Raddato"
imageCreditLink="https://www.flickr.com/photos/carolemage/8131842911"
image="pantheon/figure3.jpg"
width="640"
height="480" %}

OK, but what was the Pantheon used for?
=======================================

'Wh-wh-whoa wait a minute, I'm only here for the answer to the social
dynamite trivia question: what is it?'

Well, its Greek name would suggest that it was a temple for 'all the
gods' -- *pan* being Greek for 'all', and *theoi* meaning 'gods'. But,
Roman history is never that simple. The Pantheon has lived through some
seismic cultural transitions and its function has shifted accordingly
over the centuries.

Cassius Dio tells us that Marcus Agrippa initially intended for the
Pantheon to honour Augustus, which, in turn, would have brought Agrippa
legitimacy and honour ([Cass. Dio
53.27.3](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/53*.html);
McEwen
[1993](https://www.academia.edu/22365332/Hadrians_Rhetoric_I_the_Pantheon):
56).

The version that followed during the reign of Hadrian is more
contentious. It is often assigned the role of a temple, due to its size,
grandeur and expense. However, all Roman temples were of a standard
rectangular shape, which we've seen the Pantheon is not. Plus, the large
circular opening at the top of the dome would have made regular services
tricky.

It seems instead that Hadrian held a circulating court within the
Pantheon as well as other buildings, as Cassius Dio helpfully recorded
([Cass. Dio
69.7.1](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/69*.html);
McEwen
[1993](https://www.academia.edu/22365332/Hadrians_Rhetoric_I_the_Pantheon):
57).

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 4. Front of the Pantheon showing inscription reading 'Marcus Agrippa, son of Lucius, made [this building] when consul for the third time'(CC BY SA 3.0)."
imageCredit="Photo by Dnalor_01"
image="pantheon/figure4.jpg"
width="406"
height="337" %}

So it was a pseudo-throne room?
===============================

More than likely, but other uses have been suggested. Christian
historian Iulius Africanus wrote that a library was built in, or close
to, the Pantheon in the third century CE (Thunø
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n269):
231).

Although it certainly wasn't limited to a scholarly function. The
Pantheon's intertwining with imperial dynasties continued into the 4^th^
century with laws said to have been announced there under Constantius in
370 CE (Thunø
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n269):
231).

Following its conversion to a Christian church under the Emperor Phocas
around 610 CE source material on the Pantheon is quiet. Perhaps the
strongest hint that the Pantheon was used as a court or throne room
through to the 7^th^ century is the Pope's use for it after its
conversion. Popes made regular visits to the Santa Maria Rotonda, as the
Pantheon came to be known, holding services and feasts there. This
became a means to extend the power and legitimacy of the Church to the
masses throughout the world, with the Pantheon becoming one of many
'stational churches' (Thunø
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n269):
231-3).

But how did they build it?
==========================

As with all ancient monuments of impressive engineering and
architectural marvel, the burning question is: 'how did they build
that?' and 'how is the damn thing still standing today?'

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 5. Cross section of the Pantheon."
imageCredit="Public Domain Dedication"
imageCreditLink="https://picryl.com/media/reconstruction-of-the-pantheon-in-rome-seen-from-the-side-cut-away-to-reveal-fbad7e"
image="pantheon/figure5.jpg"
width="640"
height="469" %}

To understand these questions, first we have to briefly discuss the
design of the Pantheon.

Visitors to the Pantheon first enter through the portico, a *very* grand
porch lined with three rows of columns. But these are not just any
columns, they're *forty foot* Corinthian granite columns shipped all the
way from Egypt! (Ressler
[2015](https://macquarie.kanopy.com/video/most-celebrated-edifice-pantheon)).
At the time of construction, a flight of stairs would have led to the
portico, but later construction raised the level of the ground and the
stairs were no longer necessary (Ressler
[2015](https://macquarie.kanopy.com/video/most-celebrated-edifice-pantheon)).

The vestibule links the portico to the main circular drum that is the
Rotunda. Once inside, the Rotunda makes for an incredible sight, its
windowless round walls, exactly 43 meters tall and 43 meters wide, form
a perfect sphere! (see figure 6; Waddell
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n157):
133).

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 6. Cross Section showing the 43m diameter sphere fitting neatly into the Drum (CC BY-SA 3.0)."
imageCredit="Derivative work by Cmglee"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pantheon_section_sphere.svg"
image="pantheon/figure6.jpg"
width="1024"
height="607" %}

From here, to marvel at the Pantheon's grandest feature all you need do
is look up! From the centre of the room you can see the famed, domed
roof with it circular opening (Oculus) at the top, letting in all manner
of weather, be it rain, hail or shine.

How many men does it take to change a dome?
===========================================

Only a few good men it seems.

The answer may be surprising, but according to careful analysis and some
quick maths, it is estimated that the Pantheon would have needed a
minimum of 240 men on site each year of its nine year construction
period (DeLaine
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n188):
190). A poultry figure when its compared to the 4000 men required to
build just the *central block* of the Baths of Caracalla (DeLaine
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n188):
190).

And to the real question ...
============================

'How does the Pantheon not topple under that massive dome?'

Well, it all comes down to two ingenious ideas that restricted lateral
thrust.

The Roman concrete used for the bricks was made in an incredibly unique
process. Mortar was mixed with lime and pozzolana (a volcanic powder
found in the town of Pozzuoli), an exceedingly useful material because
it could be cured in water without air (Martines
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n120):
126-7).

Into this mix different aggregates were thrown, all with different
weights and structures. the base of the dome had bricks with the
heaviest aggregates -- brick fragments. What followed were layers of
concrete with increasingly lighter aggregate materials. First were brick
fragments, then layers of tufa, followed by lighter tufa and lastly,
pumice mixed together with volcanic slag (Martines
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n120):
126-7). This process lessened the otherwise significant amount of
lateral thrust the dome would have exerted onto the drum.

The honeycomb patterns (or coffers) and Oculus (seen in figure 6), while
pleasing to the eye, served more than an aesthetic purpose. They again
helped make the dome lighter to further reduce lateral thrust (Martines
[2015](https://archive.org/details/ThePantheonFromAntiquityToThePresentTodA.MarderMARKWILSONJONES2015/page/n120):
127).

So are you ready for a Roman themed trivia night?
=================================================

While you're now well equipped to answer those big questions, it's
important to remember that today's Pantheon is very different in content
and aesthetics to what was originally built. The sources tell us that
pieces, artefacts and statues in the Pantheon have been changed,
removed, lost, or damaged over the centuries. This, in part, explains
how the Pantheon has managed to survive as long as it has (Moore
[1899](https://www.jstor.org/stable/496616?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents):
40-3).

Successive generations have marvelled at its architectural uniqueness
and symbolic importance, and kept it alive. As such, it shouldn't be a
surprise to learn that the Pantheon attracts 7 million visitors
annually.

New rulers have come and gone in Rome, but the Pantheon remains
standing.

Further Reading
===============

[A travellers blog with loads of pretty pictures of the Pantheon
Interior, 'A Singaporean's Maiden Trip to
Europe'](https://kurodatenshi.travellerspoint.com/23/).

[A schmick looking 3D model of the interior of the Pantheon, put
together by Mathew
Brennan.](https://sketchfab.com/3d-models/pantheon-interior-a5223378f80f4b87acb4491f1f4f920a)

[Roma Experience 'The Imperfect Perfection of the Pantheon in Rome'.\
](https://www.romaexperience.com/rome-blog/the-imperfect-perfection-of-the-pantheon-in-rome)

Bibliography
============

Ancient Sources
---------------

*Scriptores Historia Augusta* 1921 trans. D. Magie, Harvard University
Press.

Cassius Dio, *Roman History* 1917 trans. E. Cary, Harvard University
Press.

Paulus Orosius, *Historiarum Adversum Paganos* 1882 ed. C. Zangemeister
(*Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum*).

Modern Sources
--------------

DeLaine, J. 2015. 'The Pantheon Builders: Estimating Manpower for
Construction' in T. A. Marder & M. Wilson Jones (eds) *The Pantheon From
Antiquity to the Present*, Harvard University Press.

Marder, T. & Wilson Jones, M. 2015. 'Introduction' in T. A. Marder & M.
Wilson Jones (eds) *The Pantheon From Antiquity to the Present*, Harvard
University Press.

Martines, G. 2015. 'The Conception and Construction of Drum and Dome' in
T. A. Marder & M. Wilson Jones (eds) *The Pantheon From Antiquity to the
Present*, Harvard University Press.

McEwen, I. 1993. 'Hadrian's Rhetoric I: the Pantheon' *Anthropology and
Aesthetics* 24: 54-66.

Moore, F. G. 1899. 'The Gilt-Bronze Tiles of the Pantheon' *American
Journal of Archaeology* 3: 40-43.

Ressler, S. 2015 'The Most Celebrated Edifice-The Pantheon' Kanopy.

Thunø, E. 2015. 'The Pantheon in the Middle Ages' in T. A. Marder & M.
Wilson Jones (eds) *The Pantheon From Antiquity to the Present*, Harvard
University Press.

Waddell, G. 2015. *Sources and Parallels for the Design and Construction
of the Pantheon* in T. A. Marder & M. Wilson Jones (eds) *The Pantheon
From Antiquity to the Present* Harvard University Press.

[^1]: These brick stamps are CIL XV.276, 362, 649a, 811b, c, 1106b,
    1406, and can be found at:

    Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum VI. 896

    <http://archive1.village.virginia.edu/spw4s/RomanForum/GoogleEarth/AK_GE/AK_HTML/TS-010.html>

    <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Corpus_Inscriptionum_Latinarum,_Vol_VI>
